THE AMERICAN CINEMA
Directors and Directions
1968–2020*




In 1968, film critic Andrew Sarris published what many consider to be the bible of auteur film theory. It was called The American Cinema and cataloged dozens of directors from Hollywood history into eleven categories, roughly arranged from most to least important in his formidable critical estimation. The volume has continued to influence writers, critics, and cinephiles of all levels, and though his ideas and methodology have filtered into thousands of books, TV shows, newspapers, websites, podcasts, and social media discussion boards, no one has ever attempted a proper (if unofficial) sequel to Sarris’ original book. 


Until now, that is. 


Though I have neither the credibility nor experience to match Mr. Sarris, I’ve nonetheless attempted to replicate his macroscopic overview of modern movies using the exact same format he did in mapping the first 40 years (give or take) of sound films. My project picks up right where Sarris’ left off, in 1968, and organizes what I consider to be the most significant voices of American filmmaking to emerge in the years and decades since the release of Sarris’ totemic text according to approximately the same criteria he used for his original categories. 


My aim is not to predict or pretend to have guessed how Sarris himself might have categorized these modern film directors. Much of his writing on many of the films/directors covered in this project is already available in print and online elsewhere. This is simply a personal attempt to evaluate the second half of American film history (1968–2020) according to the same logistical approach Sarris used to evaluate the first half. All perspectives and opinions are entirely my own and do not reflect those of any other writer, critic, or film historian.


Thanks for reading, everyone.




— Jake Sweltz




*note: film history being somewhat more unruly than written attempts to contain it, some films covered in these pages may fall slightly outside the confines of this time period.